In this section, we are going to step away from WordPress to talk about SQL.
SQL stands for Structured Query Language.
It's the last language we will be learning in this course throughout our journey.
I've mentioned the database several times.
However, we never examined the database.
That's going to change.
The next block we are going to work on will involve the database before getting into the next block.
I've included this section.
For those of you unfamiliar with databases, if you already have knowledge of databases, feel free
to skip this section for the rest of you.
Let's learn the fundamentals of working with a database.
Let's begin our discussion by talking about what a database is.
A database is a program for storing data.
It's as simple as that.
Databases play a vital role in our world.
Without them, data would be constantly lost.
Unlike programming languages, databases can persist.
Data in JavaScript defining a variable will store data on the user's machine.
However, the data will be lost upon refreshing the page.
Programming languages do not store data forever.
If a system restarts, the system's memory is completely wiped, we would lose everything.
Databases are different.
They can store and maintain data forever.
It doesn't matter if a system crashes, we can reboot our PCs to continue using the same data.
There are dozens of databases available.
There are product high in demand.
By using WordPress, we can skip researching various databases at the end of the day.
WordPress supports two databases called Maya SQL and Maria DB.
Both are great databases.
In the resource section of this lecture, I provide links to both databases.
My SQL is the older of the two databases.
In fact, it's one of the most popular databases in the world.
Technically, my SQL is an open source database.
Over a decade ago, my SQL was acquired by a company called Oracle.
Oracle has privatized some of the code for my SQL.
At the time, many developers disagreed with this move.
They believe that my SQL should remain completely free and open source.
Instead of fighting with Oracle.
The original maintainers of MySQL have forked the database into a new database called Maria DB.
Forking is the process of creating a copy of a program to take it in a different direction.
It's an analogy to the fork in the road metaphor.
Maria Dib and MySQL are mostly compatible with each other.
For this reason, WordPress supports both databases.
Our code is going to work with both databases.
You shouldn't have a problem with either database.
Our local environment is using Maria DB.
However, if you selected MySQL, that won't be a problem.
The syntax for both databases is nearly identical.
Let's try viewing the database on your computer.
Open local.
Your server should be turned on, otherwise you will not be able to view the database on local.
There's a tab called database.
Under this tab, we're provided with information for connecting to the database.
Alternatively, we can click on the admin or link to open the database in the browser.
And Myrna is a completely different program from my school or Maria Deeb.
It's a program for inspecting a database.
Typically, a database can be viewed from the command line.
In my opinion, using the command line for interacting with a database is hard.
Luckily, this is a popular opinion.
There are developers who have created applications for viewing databases with a graphical interface.
Local will install admin.
With our environments, I think admin is a great tool.
However, you may want to program with additional features.
That's perfectly fine.
Let's explore other options in the resource section of this lecture.
I provide links to additional programs for managing databases.
The first tool is called my SQL Workbench.
This is the official tool for interacting with my SQL databases with an interface.
While this tool was created for my SQL, it's 100% compatible with Maria dev databases.
The next tool is called Heidi SQL.
This is my favorite tool for working with SQL databases.
It's extremely performant and easy to use.
However, support for Linux or Mac is limited.
If you're on a mac, check out the last link.
There's a database client called SQL Pro.
All of these options are great choices.
Alternatively, you can do your own research for this course.
We are going to use admin.
The other programs have additional features we may not need there, cluttered with options which can
make it difficult to learn.
A database admin nurse interface is cleaner and easier to use.
After you're finished this course, you're more than welcome to explore other options admin or is going
to have everything we'll need for database management.
One more thing.
It's not necessary to become a database pro.
WordPress does an incredible job of managing the database.
You can design plugins and blocks without directly manipulating the database.
WordPress has dozens of functions for interacting with the database.
You will be able to get away with the bare minimum of knowledge.
In the next lecture, let's begin exploring the database created by local for WordPress development.